Good day, i'm Norman wildberger and today were to
talk about applications of the idea of vector that
we introduced in our last video a parallelogram
is a particular type of quadrilateral meaning
that there are four points in the plane and no
three of these points should be on a line our
official definition could be expressed this way
that a 1 a 2 a 3 a 4 is a parallelogram it means
that the vector a 1 a 2 is equal to the vector
a 4 a 3 so we require that this vector from here
to here is equal to this vector from here to here
and that turns out to be equivalent to the other
opposite vectors being equal a 2 a 3 equals a 1
a 4 in other words this vector here equals this
vector here in this particular example here
are what the numbers look like the vector a
1 a 2 is 1 3 because we go over 1 and up three
going from a 1 to a 2 that's the same as going
from a four to A 3 over 1 and up three the vector
a 1 a 4 is over 5 and up 1 that's the same as the
vector a 2 a 3 over 5 and up 1 and I remind
you that we use round brackets for vectors to
distinguish them from points which are expressed
with square brackets the vector notation allows us
to do arithmetic with vectors for example we can
combine vectors to form new vectors the vector a
1 a 3 which is a diagonal of this parallelogram is
a combination of a 1 a 2 and a 2 a 3 so arithmetic
Li there's the vector a 1 a 2 there's the vector
a 2 a 3 to combine them or add them we just add
them component wise the 1 plus 5 gives us 6 the
3 plus 1 gives us 4 and indeed we can check that
going from here to here involves going over six
and going up four so this is indeed the vector
six four in a similar kind of way if we wanted
to describe the other diagonal say the vector
a to a 4 then that could be expressed as this
vector Plus this vector now this vector a 2 a
3 is 5 1 while the vector a 3 a 4 is a little
bit different from a 4 a 3 because it's going
in the opposite direction so it's negative of
this one so we have to take 5 1 and we have to
subtract 1 3 to get 4 minus 2 that's the vector
a 2 a 4 and it's an interesting property and
the fundamental property of a parallelogram that
the two diagonals that we've just found actually
bisect each other when they meet in other words
at that intersection point let's call it D this
vector is equal to this vector and this vector
equals this vector up to now we've talked about
lines in terms of their equations so here's a
picture of a line that line L in the Cartesian
plane with coordinates X here along here and Y
along here and this line for example goes to the
point 2 0 3 2 4 4 5 6 also 1 minus 2 and it's
equation is 2x minus y minus 4 equals 0 which
we encode in the triple of coefficients so we say
the Lydell is the proportion 2 2 minus 1 2 minus 4
now the vector language gives us another important
way of describing this same line namely the idea
is we can describe that line by two pieces of
information the first is a point that lies on
the line and that point can be any point let's
call it a and the second piece of information
is a vector which specifies the direction of that
line so that vector could be any vector which is
in the direction of the line that I've chosen this
little vector V here which is over 1 and up to to
the vector 1 2 so in terms of that point and the
vector we can say that the line L is a is of the
form a plus lambda V in other words it's all those
points that are obtained by starting with a and
adding some arbitrary multiple of V for example
if a was the point 3 2 then we could express the
same line as 3 2 plus lambda 1 2 so we start at
3 2 and we're allowed to add any multiple of the
vector 1 2 and that gives us as lambda varies
all possible points lying on the line and not
just points in that direction but also points in
that direction because lambda is also allowed to
be negative another very useful aspect of vectors
is to be able to introduce f-fine combinations of
points here's an example of a line going through
the point a with coordinates 1 6 and B with
coordinates 5 2 suppose we were interested in the
midpoint of that segment in other words the points
C which lies exactly halfway between a and B well
it's pretty clear that what we need to do is we
need to take the x-coordinate which is halfway
between 1 and 5 namely 3 and the y coordinate
which is halfway between 6 and 2 namely 4 and that
is indeed the way to get the midpoint another way
of thinking about that is to introduce the vector
V that goes from A to B the vector V is obtained
by taking the difference between the coordinates
here and the coordinates here 5 minus 1 is 4 and
2 minus 6 is minus 4 that's the vector joining
A to B now if we're interested in the midpoint
here what we can do is we can start at a and we
can add half of that vector V half the way to B
so half of V will be the vector 2 minus 2 and so
another way of obtaining this midpoint see used to
start at a and to add half of V so we take the
point a just one six and we add this half of V
to minus two and if you add this and this you get
three four that's a useful way of thinking because
it allows for generalization we can describe any
point on this line as a combination of the point
a and a multiple of this direction vector V
V is the vector a B so an arbitrary point of
the form a plus lambda a B can be symbolically
written in the following way we can write a plus
lambda the vector a B was obtained arithmetic Li
by taking the difference between the coordinates
of B and a and if we combine these two things
there's an a here minus lambda a for a total
of 1 minus lambda a and lambda B this is called
an affine combination of the points a and B and
it represents a point lying on the line a B
when lambda is equal to 1/2 we get what we
call the midpoint but we can also consider other
combinations for example this point D is a plus
3/4 of the vector V and so when we write it in
terms of a and B we get 1/4 a plus 3/4 B meaning
that it's intuitively it's a weighting of the
points a and B 1/4 waiting to a 3/4 waiting to B
and since 3/4 is bigger than 1/4 we get something
that's closer to B but still on the line a B so
this is a new way of describing points lying on
the line as a combination of a and B where the two
coefficients always add up to 1 so those are some
interesting applications of vectors which are very
useful objects for geometry now that we've done
a fair amount of elementary geometry it's time to
survey and review what exactly are the important
conclusions to be drawn for public school
education which is one of our main interests in
this series so next time we're going to address
some of those issues I hope you'll join me for
that I've Norman Wildberger thanks for listening